The Red Fort
Built by Mughal emperor Shah Jahan as the palace fort of his capital Shahjahanabad, the Red Fort is famous for its massive enclosing walls. The fort’s construction was completed over a span of ten years, between 1638 and 1648. The Fort is the center of Delhi and it houses a large number of museums. Not only the accommodation for the emperors but also it was the center for Mughal state politics and for setting events that impact the region critically.

When India got independence, the country’s first Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru celebrated the historic occasion by hoisting the national flag above the Lahori Gate of the Red Fort. After Prime Minister Nehru, the hoisting of the national flag at Red Fort became a symbolic gesture and every prime minister after him has followed it to honour the freedom fighters and their sacrifices. The flag hoisting is also a symbol of national pride. The President of India also delivers a televised address to the nation but that is done a day before Independence Day.

Mahabalipuram Temple
The city of Mahabalipuram was founded by the Pallava king Narasimhavarman I in the 7th century AD. The mandapa or pavilions and the rathas or shrines shaped as temple chariots are hewn from the granite rock face, while the famed Shore Temple, erected half a century later, is built from dressed stone.

The complex consists of three separate shrines: two dedicated to the god Shiva, and one to Vishnu. The Vishnu shrine is the oldest and smallest of the three shrines, The other elements of the temple, including the gateways, walls, and superstructures were constructed out of quarried stone and mortar.

The Ellora Caves
Ellora also spelled Elura, a series of 34 magnificent rock-cut temples in northwest-central Maharashtra state, western India. They are located near the village of Ellora, 19 miles (30 km) northwest of Aurangabad and 50 miles (80 km) southwest of the Ajanta Caves. Spread over a distance of 1.2 miles (2 km), the temples were cut from basaltic cliffs and have elaborate facades and interior walls.

A UNESCO World Heritage Site located in the Aurangabad district of Maharashtra, it is one of the largest rock-cut Hindu temple cave complexes in the world, featuring Buddhist and Jain monuments with artwork dating from the period 600–1000 CE.

The Golden Temple
Sri Harmandir Sahib (Golden Temple ) The Golden temple is located in the holy city of the Sikhs, Amritsar. The Golden temple is famous for its full golden dome, it is one of the most sacred pilgrim spots for Sikhs. The Mandir is built on a 67-ft square of marble and is a two storied structure.

The Golden Temple is so called because the entire upper half of the temple is inlaid with copper covered over by gold plate. The water that surrounds the Golden Temple is a sacred pool known as the Amrit Sarovar meaning, “Pool of Nectar”.

Operation Blue Star was the codename of a military operation carried out by Indian security forces between 1 and 10 June 1984 in order to remove Damdami Taksal leader Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale and his followers from the buildings of the Golden Temple, the holiest site for Sikhs located in Amritsar, Punjab, India. This caused a lot of protest and anger in the people of the Sikh community which eventually led to the assassination of the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi.

Watch the vidios for a better understanding and appreciation of Ancient Indian Architecture!





Also go through the Wikipedia article 👇!
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Architecture_of_India

SUMMARY

The lesson provides a vivid picture of the ancient Indian architecture. The essay covers the prominent styles, the influences, the patrons and examples of various architectures. It begins with the Mauryan era (BC 3rd century to 1st century) architecture that was partially influenced by the Persians and the Greeks. This eventually led to the development of a new school/style of architecture called ‘Gandhara’. The style of architecture emerged from the blending of Greek and Indian art forms. Gandhara style life like statues of The Buddha and Bodhisattvas richly resembled those of Greek gods. They used ornaments, costumes and drapery to make them look beautiful. They also used stone, terracotta and cement like material to make statues. Monolithic pillars with carvings, stupas with Jataka stories, etc. are examples. Many of these pillar tops, known as capitals, depicted beautiful engravings of various animals.


Mathura school and Amaravathi school are the other art forms that enjoyed patronage in both the North and South India. These two are indigenous/native styles of architecture. Amaravathi and Nagarjunakonda are places in Andhra Pradesh that have these architecture models. During the Gupta era, there began the practice of building free-standing Hindu temples. Cave architecture as famously found in Ajantha, Ellora Caves, is another popular form. Temples cut from huge rocks are called Rock-cut temples. The Kailash Temple at Ellora and the ratha temples of Mahabalipuram are some examples of well known Rock cut temples. Rock temples like those in Mahabalipuram, Belur, Halebidu are great examples of this kind of architecture. Odisha has some most beautiful temples like Jagannath temple in Puri. Gujarat Kolkata are also homes for some exquisite architectural wonders. Temple building activities in India achieved international recognition and resulted in major tourist attractions.


Dravida style of architecture mainly consists of Vimana or Shikhara high walls and the gateway topped by a Gopuram. Nagara style on the other hand, has the Shikhara in the form of a spiral roof, the Garbhgriha or sanctum and the Mandapas.
